# Network

Consisting of two or more things sharing resources.
- It is powerful.
- Computer acts like **client**(request for resources(sends)) and **server**(controls & provides).
**NB**. **Server**: has high RAM, CPU...
- server has its own OSs.
**Eg**. ` Windows server 2012R2`
- **Server Rack**: is used for holding servers, because to reduce the hotness of server(for ventilation). holds:  switch, modem, servers, firewall, display...
# Need of Network

- Enhance communication
- Share resources
- Facilitated centralized management
- Internet
# Network Classification(two ways)
- Based on **geography** and **Components**.
#### Based on **Geography**
-  **LAN**, **MAN**, **WAN**
- **LAN**: higher speed, inexpensive to install. eg: classroom, school, single building.
- **MAN**(Metropolitan area Networks): span the distances of metropolitan city. 
     Eg. Holds government offices, buildings and headquarters...
    - Uses fiber optics cable, and the cost of installation is higher.
- **WAN**(world area network): larger than a single city. Eg, Internet
## Based on Components (clients and servers)

1. **Peer to peer**: considered equal. and it is easy/cheep. 
   - clients with clients or servers with servers.
   - For small companies and home.
   - Collects maximum **10 devices.**
2. **Server based**: centralized control (server).
3. **Client based**:  peer to peer but one client selected and become acts as a server. 
   - Eg.  mini-militia game controller nobie.
# IP (internet protocol)

**Network layer protocol**: ways to identify a machine on a network.
## Uses of IPs
- Connect to another computer or a network
- Transfer email/files
- identify a device
### IPs has two versions(IPV6 and IPV4)
## IPV4
- Old version but still we use it.
- Holds 32 bit sequence of 1s and 0s. easier to use.
- **4-decimal numbers** separated by periods using **dots**(.)
- IP generated by **DHCP**(Automatic) and **Manually**(static).
- The way of writing more options called: **The dotted decimal format**.
### IP-Structure

- IP has 4 sections(octates) and each section can range from 0 to 255.
- **Octates**: each sections (8-bits).
**EG**2.  192.168.123.12     or     01101101 .11100011 .01010101 .10101001
- Each section is 8-bit long (00000000-11111111).
- **EXERCISE**: Which one is the correct **IP**?
1.  192.1.1.1         ....Correct IP
2.  259.1.10.111   ....Incorrect, bc, can't use 259 for IP(bc, the range is 0-255 only)
3.  1,2,13,14         ....Incorrect, bc, can't use comma to separate periods.
## Every IP Addresses has 2 parts
1. **Network**: network identification.(yegna, yegorebet wifi)
2. **Host**: user(device) identification.(PC, Phone)
```
EG. 192      .168     .123     .12
    Network  Network  Network  Host
```
**NB**. The first(1) host address is called: **GATWAY ADDRESS**.
### There are five classes of private addresses
- **Class A**: GOVERNMENTs
- **Class B**: Medium Companies
- **Class C**: Small Companies
## CLASS A
